# Taxi Company Analysis Dashboard (Power BI)

## Overview
This project analyzes data from a riders company using Power BI to uncover insights into ride patterns, revenue trends, rider behavior, driver's behaviour and operational efficiency.

The dashboard provides interactive visualizations to help owners make data-driven decisions regarding pricing, route management, staffing and demand forecasting.

## Dataset Description
The dataset contains the following key features and description:

**Driver's**
| Column Name        | Description |
|------------------|------------|
| driver_id   | Identifier for drivers (Primary Key) |
| name  | names assigned to each driver |
| city   | city a driver is based in |
| signup_date     | Date each driver starts work |
| rating       | Drivers rating |

- Data Size: 2001 rows
- Time Range: 2/1/2021 to 26/6/2022

**payments**
| Column Name        | Description |
|------------------|------------|
| payment_id   | Identifier for payments (Primary Key) |
| ride_id  | Identifier for each ride (Foreign Key) |
| amount   | amount paid for each ride |
| method     | method used for payment (card/cash/paypal/voucher) |
| paid_date       | date each payment was made |

- Data Size: 50,001 rows

**riders**
| Column Name        | Description |
|------------------|------------|
| rider_id   | Identifier for riders (Primary Key) |
| name  | name assigned to each rider |
| signup_date   | sign up date for each rider |
| city     | city each rider is based in |
| email       | email of each rider |

- Data Size: 10,001 rows

**rides**
| Column Name        | Description |
|------------------|------------|
| ride_id   | Identifier for rides (Primary Key) |
| rider_id  | Identifier for riders (Foreign Key) |
| driver_id   | Identifier for drivers (Foreign Key) |
| request_time     | time the ride was requested |
| pickup_time       | time the rider was picked up |
| dropoff_time       | time of drop off |
| pickup_city       | city where the rider was picked up |
| dropoff_city       | where the rider was dropped off |
| distance_km       | the distance of the ride |
| status       | status of if the ride wsa completed or cancelled |
| fare       | amounteach ride costs |

- Data Size: 50,001 rows


## Data Cleaning & Transformation
Data preprocessing steps included:

- Check for duplicate records in each table and removed them.
- Check for null values and found none in all the tables.
- Converted datetime columns to proper format.
- Some of the values had incorrect spelling which gave double values. Adjusted it to one spelling.
- Filtered out invalid trips (e.g. negative fares and amounts)
- Created Calendar table
- Created calculated columns:
  - Found the Sign up time frame in Days for drivers
  - Sign up time frame in Days for riders
  - Delay in Pick up in Minutes
  - Route (pick up City to Drop off city)
  - Month (in Words)
  - Month (in Numbers)
  - Time Segment (Morning, Afternoon or Evening)
  - Day of the Week (in Words)
- Created Calculated Measures:
    - Number of Drivers (Distinct count)
    - Average Pick up time
    - Average Monthly Rides
    - Cancellation Rate
    - Total Rides count

## Tools & Technologies
- Power BI (Data Modeling & Visualization)
- Power Query (ETL)
- DAX (Calculated Measures)

## Dashboard Features
The dashboard includes:

Main Page:

- KPI Cards (Number of Rides, Total Fares, Total Distance travelled, Total amount paid)
- Time-based analysis (Amount and Fares by month, Number of rides each month)
- Geographic analysis (Number of cancelled and completed rides by city, Top 5 routes travelled)

Rider's Page:

- KPI Cards (Number of Riders, Average number of days rider has spent patronising)
- Time-based analysis (Average pick up time by month)
- Geographic analysis (Number Riders in each city)
- Top 10 distance travelled by each rider
- Highest Number of rides


Driver's Page:

- KPI Cards (Number of Drivers, Average pickup Delay in minutes)
- Time-based analysis (Delay in Minutes by each driver, Sverage Monthly Rides by each driver)
- Geographic analysis (Number of drivers in each city)
- Top 5 drivers by Km
- Total fares generated by each driver

## Key Questions Answered

### Demand Analysis
- There is way more demand for rides in the morning time. Seems like the rush hour period. The least demand is at night. All days have almost equal demand for rides, but Saturday is the highest
  followed by Saturday.

### Revenue Insights
- Total amount paid to the account is 1.63 million but the total fare to be paid is 2.04 million. Which means some customers didn't pay up. The data in terms of finances don't match up.
- Same periods with the most ride orders also generate the most revenue

### Staffing Insights
- There are 2000 drivers for 10,000 riders. That's a 2:1 ratio. I think the number of drivers are too many for the riders, considering they don't all order rides at the same time. We need to study the dirvers routine
  and see who to drop off.
- The ratings for drivers are up to 4.48 out of 5. Work on the rating.

### Location Insights
- Highest pick up city is in Ottawa, there is not much gap in the numebers.
- The most common routes are Calgary to Toronto, then Los Angeles to Ottawa.
- Most cancelled rides comes from Chicago and most completed one is are from Ottawa.
- The number of cancelled rides are to be looked at and tried to reduced, they look too high compared to the number of rides.

### Trip Behavior
- Total Distance recorded is 774,140Km.
- The far is directly proportional with distance in all. except for the irregularities with 0.

### Payment Analysis
- All methods of payment are used for almost the same amount and also almost the same number of times.
- They don't affect fares or rides in anyway. Diverse payment method is still good.

## Key Insights
- Peak demand occurs during rush hour (morning, evening is low)
- Locations are random and generate almost the same fares in all city
- Payment methods also don't affect the fares or rides.
- Weekend demand differs significantly from weekdays
- Data is redundant, more information is needed on the finances
- The drivers can do better with the delay in pick up.
- Deploy more drivers in the morning than any other time of the day.
  
